So we have tail and Z first.
Yeah. Thanks Caroline.
Thank you so much. When you're ready. Yeah.
So we have 10 minutes with you and you know how it works.
Yeah, thank you.
Um, Marlina, it's Carolyn Young, chief Executive
of Retail nz, and my colleague,
I'm Denise Garland.
I'm the advocacy manager at Retail nz.
Look, thank you very much for the opportunity to come in
and speak, and I think, um, you know,
this is a really complex area in terms of the retail space
and I, and, and you know, there's a bit
of a push pull factor that we see amongst our members.
Our members, you know,
go from really small individual stores
to large national stores
and some of which are multinational.
Mm-hmm. And so the challenges that we have seen really, um,
New Zealand is a diverse country,
and we are spread over three islands, um,
two long skinny islands where we mostly live
around the outskirts.
And distributing goods
and services across the country can be challenging
and it can be expensive.
And those things mean that, um, getting price,
uh, it gives price pressure
and getting, you know, um,
competitive pricing can be quite challenging,
especially if you're smaller.
So there are some advantages in the things
that we've seen from some smaller businesses being able
to collaborate and be able to negotiate collectively.
And there are some, um, some advantages
of bigger businesses also having those, um, abilities.
And then if you look at a position that we're in right now
and some feedback, we've been going out to members to ask
what the impact of the current situation with Iran could be.
As an example to think about in your considerations,
larger businesses, um, have said to us that they are, uh,
likely to see some price increases from suppliers,
which they'll absorb as much of those price pressures
that they can until it gets to a point
where they would need to pass those on.
So, um, and this is something that we see quite common.
It's quite common for a larger business to absorb
supplier price increase
before anything is passed on further down the track.
With a smaller business, they don't have that ability,
even if they're buying sort of in a collective space.
So we do need some big businesses to be able
to give competitive pricing in New Zealand
and understanding it's only 5 million people.
So I think there's kind of two different things. Yeah.
And I think, um, as well, like, I mean,
retail NZ sees the benefits in those in collaboration spaces
and, and from the different sizes.
Um, I guess there's different views as to what would benefit
of the, the purchasing power of small businesses being able
to collaborate,
but also in terms of things like sustainability,
recycling schemes is sort of where, um,
our bigger members would see benefits in, in supporting
that kind of, um, collaboration space.
Um, there was also a, a bit of weariness as well
amongst our members regarding the, um, merger regime, um,
proposed changes just in terms of clarity over
what some of the definitions were.
And also noting that the changes in Australia have only just
come into place and that we, they haven't really been able
to see how that will play out
and sort of noting that perhaps caution is the best, um,
best way go forward at this stage. Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. So happy to take any
Questions. Oh, thank you.
Uh, questions. Yeah, thank you both.
Um, Caroline, interested in, uh,
your point around the collaboration.
Do you, so do you think those roles will have, um,
a disproportionately larger impact on the larger businesses?
Is that what we are taking from this or, um,
and I'm also interested in your view
around the predatory pricing rule, whether you think
that will have disproportionate effect
on some of your larger members.
I think, um, it's a bit about caution.
I think as we were saying is that, um, you need
to be really careful that you don't say, uh,
that every large business is, are disadvantaged
to New Zealand and that they don't create competition
or they don't provide good pricing
because large businesses ha uh, have their own, um,
their own market strategy around what it is they want to do
and how they want to compete.
And so we don't want to put in place a regime that is going
to think, they'll sit back
and think, well, okay, well it doesn't,
it's not advantageous for us
to find the best pricing out there
because we're gonna get hammered by other things.
So I think it's about really understanding the balance
that businesses are trying to get the best prices
for New Zealand so they can get good market share, um,
without, you know, coming in with a big stick.
So it is a real, a real thing about getting that balance
and making sure that we don't, um, perceive that.
I mean, if we take the supermarkets as an example,
we have two major supermarket,
well three major supermarkets in New Zealand,
and there has been a lot of talk about trying to get a third
or fourth one, you know, food stuff, north Island,
south Island, and Woolworths.
Um, whilst everybody wants a another supermarket national
chain to come to New Zealand, no one's stepping up.
There's no nothing stopping someone coming in.
So we have to acknowledge
that supermarkets here are working hard
to do the best they can.
And I think when you look at, if you look,
whether you're looking at hardware or, um, technology
or any of those other areas, you've
to really take into account
that businesses are trying to do the best.
But there are some challenges in New Zealand's landscape.
So it's a fine balance.
It's time. Um, it's time. Oh, it's 10 minutes. Oh, sorry.
10 minutes. Yeah. So you a supplementary Yep.
Um, interested in coming back to project racing,
but can I ask you about what, um, in the merger rules is one
of the things that has come up with your members?
The, um, voluntary undertakings, um, part of that regime?
I guess that would be the thing that we would point to
as one of the new parts of that.
It's more like the Australian system.
Your members will be familiar with this
because they, they make voluntary undertakings with ir.
Um, how, how has that gone for your
Membership? It was
more around sort of definitions around assets
and the substantially less lessening competition in the
market where sort of where they had their concerns as to how
that might be viewed and exactly.
Um, so that's sort of where they were, um,
most reluctant.
And also the fact that, you know,
there is case law out there already to guide New Zealand,
um, in terms of other situations where,
where this may have been tested through there.
So that sort of where, where
that they had their reluctance in that space.
Mm-hmm. Um, just on the predatory pricing, Tess, I think,
um, retail is an interesting example of
where New Zealanders might really benefit from, um,
having some clear rules, like some clearer rules I guess,
around, um, overseas competitors coming, leading loss,
leading for a long time in the market, um, backed
by either private equity or, or big pockets.
Um, did,
did you have any positive feedback about the introduction
of, um, a erasing which was clearer under 36 c, um,
to, you know, to make more credible prosecutions
of competition from overseas
To prevent that situation?
Yes, that would be positive.
And I think, you know, one of the big challenges
that we do have in New Zealand right now is, um,
New Zealand is buying offshore and the likes of Temu
and Sheen and what that means for New Zealand economy
and what it means for, you know, recycling
and the longevity of goods and those sorts of things.
So, um, kind of slightly different,
but definitely it's still predatory pricing when you think
about, you know, what happens when you go onto those sites
and, and who's lured in
and where those products end up in
New Zealand landscape. Mm-hmm.
Hmm. All right. Good. Anymore? No.
Looks like no more questions. Thank you so much for
Thank, I appreciate your time.
Right. So next we have, um,
so we should go to Ed Miller.
Uh, yeah. All right.
So we go to Center for International Corporate Text
Accountability and Research, and he is on Zoom.
Uh, thank you so much, Edward, for your submission.
Thank you. Can you see and hear me?
Uh, we can see you and we can hear you as well.
We have 10 minutes with you.
So, uh, after you have spoken to your submission,
if there is any time left,
there might be questions from members. Thank you.
Fantastic. Thanks very much.
Well, um, my name's Edward Miller.
I work for an organization called Sitar,
where I undertake corporate research on a number
of different markets in a number
of different countries all around the world.
Um, thanks very much for the opportunity to submit.
Um, and thanks to the committee for all the work
that's been done in this space so far.
It's really great to see positive reform in this sector.
Um, like the Commerce Act, I was born in 1986
and like the Commerce Act,
I'm losing hair in all the wrong places.
And I think it's great to see, um, this initiative to try
and reform this legislation.
I mean, unfortunately here in New Zealand, we, we kind
of live now under the yoke
of oligopoly power in many places.
You know, we have non-competitive markets in, in banking,
energy, grocery building materials, telecoms, insurance,
a big chunk of workers
and consumers weekly wage bill goes into the oligopoly
sectors of the economy.
Um, in my prior role
as the researcher at Workers First Union,
we represent workers in a number of these sectors
where they were, um, unfortunately on the receiving end
of both, um, as consumers having to deal
with non-competitive markets, um, for, um, fund, you know,
getting access to basic goods and services,
but also as workers being in non-competitive labor markets
where there were very few employers,
very little competition.
Um, whether you like unions
or not, having a short, a small number
of employers in the market,
in the labor market means there's very little competition
and there's very few protection measures for workers.
So they end up being pushed towards unions
more than they otherwise would.
Um, we got here under the current act, we got
to this position under the current act, which was kind
of a product of that Chicago School of Regulation
of competition, regula regulation,
which put efficiency gains ahead of competition
for consumers.
So regardless of
how those efficiency gains were distributed,
whether they went to workers, consumers,
or whether they went to the, um, holders
of businesses themselves passed on as
as dividends to shareholders.
And unfortunately, that is the situation that has happened,
and it continues to happen a lot of the time.
I think that view is changing,
and I think the reforms in this legislation are really
helpful in getting us towards that.
But there are a few things in the rules that, um,
will keep us in that efficiency model,
and I'll talk to those at the end.
So I'm really glad to see the, um, targeting the problem
of creeping acquisitions.
I saw this up close in a number
of sectors in my previous work,
particularly in the waste sector in which essentially there
are now two companies that, um, run the vast majority
of waste concessions around the country and environ waste
and waste management, and also in the bus sector,
which looks like there are a number of companies,
but in fact there are essentially two Kinetic,
which owns Go Bus and NZ Bus
and Richie's, which is owned by KKR, the big, uh,
New York investment firm based outta the Cayman Islands.
Um, since then I've looked at another, a number
of other sectors like early childhood education,
aged care diagnostic services, medical imaging services,
primary care, dental care, all
of these quite fundamental support services, uh,
fundamental services, often services that are funded
by the public purse in which this problem of,
of creep creeping acquisitions
by private equity funds has meant there is very little
competition in the marketplace,
and often tax dollars are being plunged into paying
for services that are more expensive than they would
otherwise be because of those creeping acquisitions.
So I want to applaud the work that's been done
so far in this space.
I think the three year aggregation rule is a really
fantastic innovation, um,
and will help slow the consolidation in some
of those sectors and possibly create space
for new market players.
Um, there will always be a behavioral response
by firms to new rules.
And, um, some of those,
I'm sure private equity funds will start changing, um,
exactly what their acquisition structures look like
and how they do acquisitions when they do them timing wise.
So there might be an argument
to shift from a three year rule
to a five year rule in the future,
which probably aligns more tightly with
what a private equity fund strategy would look like.
Um, but there's behavioral changes either way as well.
The other behavioral response that you, we are likely to see
and we've seen in Australia is that when the rules come in,
then um, a whole lot
of acquisitions are brought forward in terms
of their existing timelines.
So you probably end up with some poor decision making
or poor deal making in the short term.
Might not be a huge amount that we can do about that.
Uh, but there will be behavioral responses.
Um, this, the new 47 E
and 47 F powers look to be really strong, innovative, um,
new rules that will make it easier for the commission
to in investigate those non notified transactions.
Um, hopefully this makes it a lot harder for mergers.
Um, that's substantially less in competition
to fly under the radar, uh,
but there is still a discovery gap
and the commission will will be at a material disadvantage
in terms of, uh, finding out about
acquisitions that are taking place.
Um, the comparison here to Australia is important.
They've moved to this mandatory notification regime
with full suspensory powers.
Um, the Australian view,
or maybe the ac CC view was
that the voluntary regime is essentially asking a shark
to report itself to a lifeguard.
Um, but once a shark has taken a chunk out of a swim,
it's very hard to stitch that back on.
So sewing things back together is a lot more difficult.
And having those mandatory powers to suspend, um,
or to suspend all
of those non notified transactions would give the commission
a bit more of an opportunity to deal
with the material disadvantages that they face in terms
of being able to engage with all of the acquisitions
that are taking place or all of the mergers.
Um, so, you know, it's a design question more than anything,
and I think it would be interesting
to get more feedback from the ACCC on
how the implementation is, is looking there.
Uh, the predatory pricing changes I think
are really fantastic.
Um, and I wanna applaud the work
that's being done in this space, moving, um, from
that purpose test, which is next to impossible to prove, uh,
purpose on the part of, um, predatory pricing
to a more objective test is a really important one.
And it's a space where we are going a bit further
than Australia as well.
So it's great to see that, you know, we, we always seem
to have, well, uh, for good reason, we always look
to Australia, uh, that, that good reason being
because so much of our economy is owned
by Australian businesses, um, not just by the big monopoly
operators, but also by, um,
Australian domicile private equity funds.
So looking to Australia is important,
but knowing when to go further than Australia
is also really valuable.
Um, and that's where I wanted to just wrap up
by saying there are a couple of areas
where I think this legislation could have gone further,
and it would be great to go further in this respect.
I think, you know, it's a bit
of a missed opportunity in some respects,
because this is, I guess the, the
what the second major reform of the Commerce Act
that we've had since it's inception.
Um, we are still stuck in the,
I guess, efficiency remains the underlying, uh,
legislative impulse within, within the proposed changes.
And the, the evidence of that is
that section 67 is still there as a kind of gateway test.
You know, the efficiency goes in the
competition machine if you like.
Uh, that's been left as is.
So there are, the way the law operates, you have two, um,
potential gateways.
There's substantial lessening in competition,
but sub, uh, mergers
or acquisitions that substantially lessen competition can
still proceed if they are deemed to, um,
satisfy the efficiency defense if they result in
public benefits.
And those public benefits do not need to.
Um, there doesn't need to be any evidence
of those public benefits really accrue to members
of the public necessarily.
So we can unfortunately,
under six section 67 approve mergers
that increase total welfare, um,
or have efficiency gains regardless of
where those efficiency gains end up,
whether they're in the pockets of workers and consumers,
or whether they're in the pockets of, uh,
shareholders from the offshore owned firms that run much
of the majority the monopoly economy.
So I think that's a major emission from the,
the, um, reforms.
And I think the second emission is
that we don't have anything in this, these changes
that will allow us to roll back the three
or four decades of consolidation that we have had.
We don't have new powers for the commission
or for other, uh, regulators to be able to break up some
of the oligopoly markets that we have
and take us back to an era of greater competition.
And I think that's the important discussion moving forward.
How do we roll back the failures of the past regime
to move forward and make sure that all the great changes
that are coming in, uh, that I've talked about, um,
have the teeth to be able to benefit workers
and consumers across the board.
Uh, thank you so much. Uh, we have time for a very,
very quick question, Dr.
Very quick David question.
Thank you, ed. Very good.
Uh, submission, um, we've, we've got a lot of people
that tell us that predatory pricing is, um, has lots
of unintended consequences,
and there is no real evidence to support
that there actually is predatory pricing.
Do you have evidence?
It's, it's a very hard thing
to put together evidence in this space.
Um, I'm just for the,
because we have so little time, I'm gonna say that the,
the best people to have evidence are those people, the,
the people that run firms who have been crushed
by the predatory pricing.
I'm not able to present evidence
for you right now within the short space of time. David,
Thank you, ed. All
right. Thank you so much.
Um, thanks, um, for your submission. Thank you. Thanks.
Uh, uh, I believe we have fired up
still at those in the rules.
Yeah. Thank you.
Is that Bianca? Yes, it is. Hi, Bianca.
We have 10 minutes with you. Excellent. Thank you,
Uh, starting?
Yep. Excellent. Thank you. Yes, honor.
Uh, good morning committee. Thank
you for inviting me to speak.
My name is Bianca Bebe.
I'm a public health researcher
and chair of, uh, fired up stilettos, which advocates
for the labor rights of independent contractors doing
various kinds of adult entertainment
and sex work in managed venues throughout New Zealand.
Um, so when fired up stilettos first came
to Parliament in 2023, um, our petition asked for,
among other things, the right
to collectively bargain while maintaining our
independent contracting status.
Um, and in his official response to US Ministers Simpson,
uh, did not commit the government
to freestanding legislation,
but said that he would consider us in changes
to the Commerce Act and wanted to thank the government
and Minister Simpson in particular,
because that has clearly happened.
Um, the changes that we see
to the Commerce Act will indeed allow us to go on the path
to collectively bargaining while staying
independent contractors.
Um, but we have a few, um, suggestions
that can give greater effect
to the government's aims without risking,
um, cartel behavior.
So clearly we strongly support the government's plan
to implement a notification regime under Schedule eight.
What we need is clarity on who can notify.
Um, when we called the Commerce Commission, they said
that in this legislation,
it's unclear if each dancer at a venue would have
to individually notify the commission,
or if contractors could sign up with a legal entity
who can then bargain on their behalf.
Uh, we wanna start using this legislation
as soon as it's enacted.
So ideally, as few bureaucratic roadblocks
as possible would be great.
The ideal scenario would be for independent contractors
to have the freedom to sign up with a legal entity, charity,
or union, who can then notify the commission
and bargain on behalf of its members.
Um, the streamlined process would reduce bureaucratic
paperwork for the commission
and encourage greater uptake among contractors,
which will intend in turn, improve competition
and working conditions in our sector.
Uh, secondly, we'd like to discuss application fees
to notify or be granted a class exemption.
We know that application fees are not generally set in
statutory law, but fees have the power to make
or break this legislation.
Uh, the best legislation in the world is not useful if the
price to access it is out of reach
of those who actually need it.
Um, we note that the legislation gives the commerce
commission the discretion to waive, um,
or reduce fees if they would present a quote undue hardship.
Um, but this solution would likely present even more
problems because the things that can lead
to undue hardship in our industry are frequently
inappropriate to discuss with people
who are untrained in matters of sexual harm.
So it would instead make much more sense for there
to be no application fee
for anyone applying under Schedule eight, since we are,
by definition, relatively low revenue contractors
who do not pose a cartel risk
through bargaining collectively.
And finally, I wanna talk about retaliation
and victimization, which is the most important aspect.
I cannot possibly overstate the level of impunity
with which venues have grown accustomed to operating.
When dancers have tried to negotiate with clubs
to remove even the most egregious
and exploitative clauses from their contracts, clubs, love
to just smirk in our faces
and say, why would we talk to you girls?
Turn 18 every day.
Multiple dancers have been explicitly told
by venue management
that they would be fired if they even followed,
fired up stilettos on their Instagram accounts,
or liked one of our posts,
particularly in places like Auckland
and Wellington with a high student population combined
with a high cost of living
and a dearth of jobs that accommodate a student's schedule.
Clubs have evolved an entire business model
around creating extractive predatory conditions
for contracted workers
and immediately firing them if they object,
because they know there's always a new
teenager who needs to pay rent.
If there is no obligation for these venues
to act in good faith, they will not.
If this legislation were to pass in its current form,
independent contractors would be able
to notify the Commerce Commission of their intent
to collectively bargain, and they would be immediately
fired for doing so.
That means no one would actually use the law as intended,
and the government's hard work would be wasted.
We don't want that to happen. So we need the protections in
place that will allow us to use this law.
I wanna end by clarifying
what our suggested changes will not do.
They will not cause any conflict
with the newly introduced gateway test
of the Employment Relations Act or
otherwise interfere with the government's aim
to establish greater clarity on the difference
between employees and contractors.
Fired up stilettos has been consistent in saying
that we were hired as contractors
and we would like to be treated as contractors.
When we contractors are allowed
to collectively negotiate our contracts,
we will increase market competition
and reduce the incentive for businesses
to misclassify their workers in the first place.
Our suggested changes will work in tandem
with many other initiatives the government is currently
working on rather than against 'em.
So to conclude, this notification regime is a great
start, but it needs teeth.
We encourage you to, uh, ensure the changes you're working
so hard to achieve cannot simply be ignored
by bad faith actors exploiting their market dominance
to reduce competition, increase prices for consumers,
and worsen working conditions for contractors.
So let's make sure the law applies equally
to everyone. Thank you.
Um, members, Christians, uh, dr. Questions, uh, Dr.
Uh, thank you, Bianca. That was very clear
and very well articulated, uh, in your submission, um,
you talk about, um, the, the screen, uh,
industry Workers Act of 22.
Yes. Um, what is it particularly that you see that
how this would work, um, in this instant if we were to,
if we were able to make any amendments to this?
I'm not sure that we could, but mm-hmm.
Um, do you think, how do you think that would be?
So there's aspects of siwa that can be, uh,
universally applied to any contractors who would be trying
to seek an exemption under Schedule eight.
So for instance, um, section 24
of siwa prohibits retaliatory termination
or non-renewal of in individual contracts.
And Section 26 requires all parties
to bargain in good faith.
That is similar to what is currently in the proposed changes
to the Commerce Act under 95 A and B.
However, 90, or sorry 97 A and B,
but 97 a specifies
that employers cannot behave in a retaliatory fashion.
And that is exactly the bind
that we have been, um, getting into.
Right? We are not trying to be reclassified as employees,
we want to be treated as contractors.
Um, but our independence
as contractors has not been respected at all.
And indeed, our, uh, rights as people has not either.
Um, another, uh, thing that could be useful, there is, uh,
section, um, in, uh, CIWA, which obviously is
for a specific, um, industry.
Um, we recognize that not all
of it is gonna be applicable to this.
There's just those two sections.
And then, um, finally, section 72 says that parties
that are un uh, unable to come to a consensus
or face some kind of a dispute in their bargaining process,
there needs to be some kind of third party that's able
to break through when there is some kind of gridlock.
Um, the Commerce Commission, uh, in our initial hearings,
um, acknowledge that many
of the terms in our contracts are likely anti-competitive.
Um, and they can see how we would have a substantial case,
but we simply do not have the market power for them
to take the time to go through a court process
for what we need.
So they have said they're already overloaded
and they can't help us.
So what Ciwa did as a workaround of that on, uh, section 72,
it said that parties that are in a dispute can apply
to the ERA for determination of the dispute.
Um, and that should be resolved, uh, uh, uh, in accordance
with how the ERA would normally do between, um,
bargaining employers
and employees in that very limited context.
Not in order to reclassify or misclassify people,
but simply to have a third party that is equipped for
that specific dynamic, um,
which can be applied appropriately even while maintaining
our independent contracting status. Mm-hmm.
Um, Ricardo, thank you so much, Bianca,
that was such a clear submission on page one.
You noted, um, some
of the problems with the status of school.
I know you talked about some of the stuff in relationship
to the student population,
but what is the end goal here
and what are you, what kind of behavior are you trying
to stamp out?
You talked a little bit about fines, for example, in, um,
your first page, but would you mind expanding a bit of
why you're coming here asking for these changes,
and what's the problem with the status quo more broadly?
Absolutely. Um, the sort of things that we're up against,
uh, the educational workforce committee when we previously,
um, submitted, acknowledged that they can't think
of a single other industry that faces, um, explicit
clauses in their contracts as we do.
So the most egregious one, I think there's a system of
fines, um, for, uh, punitive,
basically punitive fines that are in contracts.
The most egregious one, I would argue is a $500 fine
and forfeiture of 50% of the knight's tips for rudeness
to management as determined by management.
Um, then also many clubs implement
explicit non-compete clauses
that extend not only while contracting at a particular club,
but also after the business
relationship has been terminated.
I included in our written submission a picture of, uh,
the mermaids contract,
which has a two year non-competition clause.
So it's, uh, a quite an irony that we find ourselves in,
right where, uh, preventing collective bargaining, uh,
among independent contractors is meant
to promote competition and anti cartel behavior.
But what has happened is, uh,
strip clubs have engaged in explicitly anti-competitive
behavior, um,
and, uh, concentrated the market to the extent
that it has significantly increased prices for consumers
and, uh, egregiously violated, um, uh,
workplace relations and safety.
Thank you so much. Um, thank you so much, Bianca,
for your submission and
thank you for answering those questions.
Thank you. Um, next we have Russell, if,
are they here on Zoom?
Yeah,
good morning.
Thank you so much. We have, uh, the names I have is Bradley,
Evan Petra, Kerry and Troy Kinon.
Yep. Thank you so much for your submission.
We have 10 minutes with you. Thank you.
Morning. Um, thank you very much to the committee
for having the opportunity to speak today.
Um, I'm Petra Kerry,
a partner in Ross Russ Bay's
competition and regulation team.
And I'm joined here with Troy Ton in the middle
and Bradley Aber.
Um, in our allocated time, we would like
to focus on the following three recommendations
and our written submission.
Firstly, Brad will speak to the removal
of the predatory pricing proposal
to avoid unintended consequences of higher prices
for consumers, um,
which has already been referenced this morning.
Um, and then my colleague Troy will speak on the, um,
proposals to change the substantial
lessening of competition test.
And finally, time permitting.
Um, I'll conclude with some supportive comments
on the proposal for behavioral remedies.
Um, and look, if we don't get there, just in, in very, um,
short, uh, brief, we are really supportive of that proposal.
We consider them positive, uh, to an NZ Inc.
Uh, subject to some important changes
that we detail in our written submission, uh,
to ensure they achieve the desire fit.
Um, so I'll just pass on to Bradley
to talk about pricing first.
Thank you pet. And thank you
to the committee for your time this morning.
As pet mentioned, um, we are opposed to clause six
of the bill that introduces a bright line prohibition on
market power pricing below cost.
Firstly, we do acknowledge the practical reality
that New Zealanders have been struggling with cost
of living pressures and
that getting the competition law settings right has an
important role to play in both delivering competitive
markets for the benefit of consumers
and also addressing cost of living pressures,
which many New Zealanders still face today.
However, in our opinion, the proposed introduction
of a bright line prohibition on
below cost pricing does not address these pressures,
and in fact, is likely to have the opposite effect
of higher prices for consumers.
Firstly, we are concerned that the proposed changes
to predatory pricing were not included in the comprehensive
review or consultation that was undertaken
by MDM to the Commerce Act.
There has been no evidence provided,
and we are not aware of any evidence
that predatory pricing is a widespread
or practical concern in New Zealand.
To the extent that there are isolated examples
of predatory pricing, we consider that the current law,
which was only recently amended in 2023, is robust enough
to address anti-competitive below cost pricing.
So there is no evidential basis to suggest
that a change is warranted in addition to there not being
evidence that changes required.
We have three main issues
with the proposed new Bright Line prohibition.
First bright line prohibitions are only appropriate
where the relevant conduct is almost always harmful.
With respect to below cost pricing, it is clear
that consumers benefit from this in the short run
and in most cases benefit from such low
prices in the long run.
There are likely to be very few cases where
below cost pricing is harmful.
The economics literature is clear
that predatory pricing is a very expensive way
to deter competition and has a very low success rate.
This is why it is important
that an actual impact on competition of the
below cost pricing is undertaken
as is required by the current law.
The second concern we have with the new, uh, prohibition is,
although there is an exception, that those exceptions
for promotional pricing do not apply,
where there's a pattern of behavior over a sustained period,
now that carve out is a likely to prohibit routine behavior
that consumers benefit from including where, um,
businesses sell perishable
or short dated stock below cost
to encourage consumption rather than wastage
selling last year's or last season's models
or stock at below cost to make room for new models
selling goods below cost to charities
or social groups to support charitable initiatives
and employee discount schemes or arrangements.
Third, we are concerned that the proposed introduction
of this, um, deeming provision will have a chilling
effect in our experience.
Businesses take their competition
or obligations very seriously.
The proposed prohibition relies on economic concepts
that are susceptible to different interpretations
and are not standard everyday accounting
or financial concepts that businesses use
to make everyday decisions.
Faced with the new Bright Line test
businesses will err on the side of compliance,
likely leading to higher prices across the economy.
We do not consider that this is in the best interest
of consumers or is consistent
with the government's objective of going for growth.
Our strong recommendation,
therefore would be to delete clause six from the bill.
Now pass on to Troy.
Thank you Brad, and good morning to the committee.
I just wanna thank the committee
for their work on this bill.
We all recognize how important it is for New Zealand
to get the competition or settings correct.
And also just want to emphasize there are aspects
of the bill we support some of the changes that are proposed
to make it easier for businesses to collaborate in relation
to positive initiatives such as collaboration,
sustainability, supply chain initiatives, health and safety.
We really support the current authorization regime
with the commission as cumbersome,
burdensome, lengthy, costly.
We just don't see it achieving
what it needs to in those spaces.
And we've certainly seen positive initiatives fall
by the wayside because of that.
So I encourage that. What I wanna focus on in my couple
of minutes today is just the proposed change
to the substantial lessening of competition standard.
In particular, the proposal that
that gets changed across the entirety of the comac,
including in relation to the behavioral
aspects of the Commiss Act.
I am very concerned about a proposal
that would make New Zealand bespoke
and different to Australia.
The New Zealand market is fundamentally integrated
with the Australian market.
There's a whole lot of benefits
to New Zealanders from having a integrated, uh,
closely aligned regulatory framework
across Australia and New Zealand.
A number of businesses operate across both those.
They set their compliance regimes, their standards,
et cetera, to reflect both those jurisdictions operations.
There was a proposal in the recent amendments in Australia
to change the substantial lesson
of competition standard across the entirety
of Australia's competition
or statute, including in relation
to this behavioral, uh, prohibitions.
But ultimately that did not occur
and that did not occur for good reason.
So we are concerned that we're looking to go alone
and different from Australia.
We do consider
that chip making this change in New Zealand will actually
reduce clarity for New Zealand businesses
or reduce efficiency for New Zealand businesses.
And also there's just no need for the change.
So the bill says that the change is for the avoidance
of doubt, and I assume it says that
because basically what the proposal is, is changing it
to make it reflect case law.
But when Parliament makes a change to a statute,
the courts assume that parliament must have intended
something to be different.
So if this change is made, the judges,
the courts will assume that this is supposed
to lower the threshold for when a, uh, substantial leasing
of competition can occur.
And we are concerned that that will be interpreted, uh,
to capture, uh,
larger businesses doing things which are actually ultimately
positive, uh, for customers such as organic growth
or successful innovation,
which obviously naturally might strengthen a business's
existing position, but it's not something
that should be deterred or prevented by competition law.
So, for example, a large business seeking to, uh, innovate
and get a patient across a new design
or a new technology, uh,
or overseas businesses that have got new innovations,
will they be concerned about launching
that in New Zealand if they could be deemed
to entrench their current position in a market?
So our view is
that risks taking New Zealand on a divergent path from
Australia and at risks, undermining growth
and innovation in New Zealand.
And also, I know there's often a temptation
to say when there's a law chain, well,
of course the Commerce Commission wouldn't enforce it in
areas where it shouldn't.
But it's important that the committee's aware that
of course the Commerce Act can also be enforced
by third parties, uh, taking, uh, private actions.
And so a concern around unfounded
or spurious claims being taken,
if someone does do something which a competitor thinks
actually makes it, makes them larger
or could somehow be deemed to
entrench their position even though it is a positive
innovation or a new technology.
So we submit that the substantial less in competition test
should remain as it currently is
and reliant on the case law
interpretation as it currently stands.
Thank you, Troy. And, and look, I'm conscious of time
and we are keen to leave, um, a couple of minutes
for questions, but maybe just briefly on the behavioral
remedies proposal, as I mentioned, we are, you know,
very supportive of that.
We think that it's actually going to, um, permit more m
and a activity in New Zealand transactions that may
otherwise not have occurred, um,
because of the, I guess the,
the constraints currently under the legislation to, uh,
for the commission to only accept structural remedies, um,
you know, has, has been a problem in our experience.
I think just one thing I would like to leave the committee
with based on some of the other submissions
that we've been hearing, we just wanna be really clear that,
um, you know, that the,
the commission would still ultimately need to be satisfied
that the merger, including any remedy,
would actually not have an effect
or likely effect on competition
or substantially lessening competition.
So, so it's not about relaxing, um,
the fundamental prohibition against
anti-competitive mergers.
It's, it's not about that at all.
Um, the commission, if it's not convinced
that potential competition harm can be sufficiently removed
to resolve the case, it actually
doesn't need to accept the remedy.
So, um, we do, uh, you know, we're really supportive
of the proposal subject to our, uh, written submissions,
um, proposed changes.
Thank you. Thank you so much for your submission.
We don't have any time left for Ians. Thank you.
Um, next we have a
deport again on Zoom.
Sorry about that. Hang on. What's going on here?
Hang on, we can hear you. Debbie can't. Yeah, hang on.
Can't see you though. Yes, we can as well.
Now, thank you so much
for your submission and thank you for your time.
We have five minutes with you.
Okay. So basically, um, I worked in the supermarket
and, uh, energy sector as a teenager.
That's where I worked in the supermarket.
And when I worked in the supermarket,
there was something circulating that the company
that I worked for wanted
to be the only supermarket in the country.
That's actually quite, and they actually gave it a good
crack until it was lit too late
because the Commerce Commission sat back and it happened.
It's actually happening now in the energy sector.
How is it that, uh, Genesis Energy were allowed
to buy Energy online, changed the name to Frank Energy,
and then absorb it last year?
How is it okay that a few years ago,
m Nuclear Energy were allowed to buy trust
power and absorb it?
That is anti-competitive behavior.
The Commerce Commission are actually part of the problem.
Who's regulating the Commerce Commission?
You give them all these powers
and they complain
to them about breaches of the Fair Trading Act.
For example, two Degrees
started slapping a fair use policy on all their plans.
And, um, I became aware of this when somebody, uh,
posted a screenshot on Spark's Facebook page of the, the,
um, of what two degrees were doing, and it's hidden cap.
You cannot slap a fair use policy on a, um, on a, uh,
unlimited slash endless plan because it's a hidden cap
and the terms, and Condit says, oh,
we will terminate your services without notice.
Um, hold up. And the hidden cap was actually 40 gig.
I'm sorry, but the Commerce Commissioner actually part
of the problem, who, who knows, who remembers, um,
simply squeezed that used to be a branded drink here.
Frugal, bought them in 2009
and asked them late years later, I believe they lied
to the Commerce Commission, the Commerce Commission
that Frugal Buy Simply Squeezed,
which would've been around about 30 years.
So they Commerce Commissioner actually part of the problem.
What are we doing about the Commerce Commission?
'cause you raise a complaint and they don't wanna know.
So my suggestion is we need
to regulate the Commerce Commission.
We need to oversee the Commerce Commission to make sure
that they're actually complying with, um, the law itself.
'cause they, they, they don't take complaints seriously.
I raised alarms with them and they, they, so no interest.
Thank you, Debbie. Um, are there any questions, uh,
members for Debbie?
Uh, no. Debbie, there are no questions.
Thank you so much for your contribution.
Okay, thank you. Thank
You. Bye bye-Bye.
Uh, so now we move into private session.